.. SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright (c) 2025 NVIDIA CORPORATION & AFFILIATES. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: LicenseRef-NVIDIA-SOFTWARE-LICENSE

.. module:: cuda.bindings

``cuda-bindings`` 13.X.Y Release notes
======================================

Released on TBD


Highlights
----------

* Migrated wheel dependencies from individual NVIDIA packages to the ``cuda-toolkit`` metapackage for improved dependency resolution and version constraints.
* Automatic CUDA library path detection based on ``CUDA_HOME``, eliminating the need to manually set ``LIBRARY_PATH`` environment variables for installation.
* The ``[all]`` optional dependencies now use ``cuda-toolkit`` with appropriate extras instead of individual packages. The NVCC compiler is no longer automatically installed with ``pip install cuda-python[all]`` as it was previously included only to access the NVVM library, which now has its own dedicated wheel. Users who need the NVCC compiler should explicitly install it with ``pip install cuda-toolkit[nvcc]==X.Y`` with the appropriate version for their needs.
* The Python overhead of calling functions in CUDA bindings in ``driver``, ``runtime`` and ``nvrtc`` has been reduced by approximately 30%.
* On Windows, the ``pywin32`` dependency has been removed. The necessary Windows API functions are now accessed directly.
* Updated the ``cuda.bindings.runtime`` module to statically link against the CUDA Runtime library from CUDA Toolkit 13.0.1.
* ``cyruntime.getLocalRuntimeVersion`` now uses pathfinder to find the CUDA runtime.


Bug fixes
---------

* Restoring the :func:`~driver.cuCheckpointProcessRestore` API removed by mistake.


Known issues
------------

* Updating from older versions (v12.6.2.post1 and below) via ``pip install -U cuda-python`` might not work. Please do a clean re-installation by uninstalling ``pip uninstall -y cuda-python`` followed by installing ``pip install cuda-python``.
