.. SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright (c) 2025 NVIDIA CORPORATION & AFFILIATES. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

.. currentmodule:: cuda.core.experimental

``cuda.core`` 0.4.0 Release Notes
=================================

Released on Oct 9, 2025


Highlights
----------

- This is the last release that officially supports Python 3.9.
- Python 3.14 is supported.
- **Experimental** free-threaded builds for Python 3.13/3.14 are made available. Any bugs can be reported to `our GitHub repo <https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python>`_.


Breaking Changes
----------------

- CUDA 11 support dropped: CUDA 11 is no longer tested and it may or may not work with ``cuda.bindings`` and CTK 11.x. Users are encouraged to migrate to CUDA 12.x or 13.x.
- Support for ``cuda-bindings`` (and ``cuda-python``) < 12.6.2 is dropped. Internally, ``cuda.core`` now always requires the `new binding module layout <https://nvidia.github.io/cuda-python/cuda-bindings/latest/release/12.6.1-notes.html#cuda-namespace-cleanup-with-a-new-module-layout>`_. As per the ``cuda-bindings`` `support policy <https://nvidia.github.io/cuda-python/cuda-bindings/latest/support.html>`_), CUDA 12 users are encouraged to use the latest ``cuda-bindings`` 12.9.x, which is backward-compatible with all CUDA Toolkit 12.y.
- Change in :class:`LaunchConfig` grid parameter interpretation: When :attr:`LaunchConfig.cluster` is specified, the :attr:`LaunchConfig.grid` parameter now correctly represents the number of clusters instead of blocks. Previously, the grid parameter was incorrectly interpreted as blocks, causing a mismatch with the expected C++ behavior. This change ensures that ``LaunchConfig(grid=4, cluster=2, block=32)`` correctly produces 4 clusters × 2 blocks/cluster = 8 total blocks, matching the C++ equivalent ``cudax::make_hierarchy(cudax::grid_dims(4), cudax::cluster_dims(2), cudax::block_dims(32))``.
- The :class:`Buffer` objects now deallocate on the stream that was used to allocate it, instead of on the default stream. We encourage users to overwrite the deallocation stream explicitly through the :meth:`~Buffer.close` method if desired. Establishing a proper stream order is the user responsibility.


New features
------------

- Added :attr:`Device.arch` property that returns the compute capability as a string (e.g., '75' for CC 7.5), providing a convenient alternative to manually concatenating the compute capability tuple.
- CUDA 13.x testing support through new ``test-cu13`` dependency group.
- Stream-ordered memory allocation can now be shared on Linux via :class:`DeviceMemoryResource`.
- Added NVVM IR support to :class:`Program`. NVVM IR is now understood with ``code_type="nvvm"``.
- Added an :attr:`ObjectCode.code_type` attribute for querying the code type.
- Added :class:`VirtualMemoryResource` for low-level virtual memory management on Linux.


New examples
------------

None.


Fixes and enhancements
----------------------

- Improved :class:`DeviceMemoryResource` allocation performance when there are no active allocations by setting a higher release threshold (addresses issue #771).
- Improved :class:`StridedMemoryView` creation time performance by optimizing shape and strides tuple creation using Python/C API (addresses issue #449).
- Fix :class:`LaunchConfig` grid unit conversion when cluster is set (addresses issue #867).
- Fixed a bug in :class:`GraphBuilder.add_child` where dependencies extracted from capturing stream were passed inconsistently with num_dependencies parameter (addresses issue #843).
- Make :class:`Buffer` creation more performant.
- Enabled :class:`MemoryResource` subclasses to accept :class:`Device` objects, in addition to previously supported device ordinals.
- Fixed a bug in :class:`Stream` and other classes where object cleanup would error during interpreter shutdown.
- :class:`StridedMemoryView` of an underlying array using the DLPack protocol will no longer leak memory.
- General performance improvement.
- Fixed incorrect index usage in vector_add example
