.. SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright (c) 2026 NVIDIA CORPORATION & AFFILIATES. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

.. currentmodule:: cuda.core

``cuda.core`` 0.7.x Release Notes
=================================


Highlights
----------

None.


Breaking Changes
----------------

- Building ``cuda.core`` from source now requires ``cuda-bindings`` >= 12.9.0, due to Cython-level
  dependencies on the NVVM and nvJitLink bindings (``cynvvm``, ``cynvjitlink``). Pre-built wheels
  are unaffected. The previous minimum was 12.8.0.


New features
------------

- Added ``preferred_location_type`` option to :class:`ManagedMemoryResourceOptions`
  for explicit control over the preferred location kind (``"device"``,
  ``"host"``, or ``"host_numa"``). This enables NUMA-aware managed memory
  pool placement. The existing ``preferred_location`` parameter retains full
  backwards compatibility when ``preferred_location_type`` is not set.

- Added :attr:`ManagedMemoryResource.preferred_location` property to query the
  resolved preferred location of a managed memory pool. Returns ``None`` for no
  preference, or a tuple such as ``("device", 0)``, ``("host", None)``, or
  ``("host_numa", 3)``.

- Added ``numa_id`` option to :class:`PinnedMemoryResourceOptions` for explicit
  control over host NUMA node placement. When ``ipc_enabled=True`` and
  ``numa_id`` is not set, the NUMA node is automatically derived from the
  current CUDA device.

- Added :attr:`PinnedMemoryResource.numa_id` property to query the host NUMA
  node ID used for pool placement. Returns ``-1`` for OS-managed placement.


New examples
------------

None.


Fixes and enhancements
----------------------

- Fixed IPC-enabled pinned memory pools using a hardcoded NUMA node ID of ``0``
  instead of the NUMA node closest to the active CUDA device. On multi-NUMA
  systems where the device is attached to a non-zero host NUMA node, this could
  cause pool creation or allocation failures. (:issue:`1603`)
- Fixed :attr:`DeviceMemoryResource.peer_accessible_by` returning stale results when wrapping
  a non-owned (default) memory pool. The property now always queries the CUDA driver for
  non-owned pools, so multiple wrappers around the same pool see consistent state. (:issue:`1720`)
- Reduced Python overhead in :class:`Program` and :class:`Linker` by moving compilation and
  linking operations to the C level and releasing the GIL during backend calls. This benefits
  workloads that create many programs or linkers, and enables concurrent compilation in
  multithreaded applications.
- Improved optional dependency handling for NVVM and nvJitLink imports so that only genuinely
  missing optional modules are treated as unavailable; unrelated import failures now surface
  normally, and ``cuda.core`` now depends directly on ``cuda-pathfinder``.
