.. SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright (c) 2026 NVIDIA CORPORATION & AFFILIATES. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

.. currentmodule:: cuda.core

``cuda.core`` 0.7.0 Release Notes
=================================


Highlights
----------

- Introduced support for explicit graph construction. CUDA graphs can now be
  built programmatically by adding nodes and edges, and their topology can be
  modified after construction.
- Added CUDA-OpenGL interoperability support, enabling zero-copy sharing of
  GPU memory between CUDA compute kernels and OpenGL renderers.
- Added :class:`TensorMapDescriptor` for Hopper+ TMA (Tensor Memory Accelerator)
  bulk data movement, with automatic kernel argument integration.
- :class:`~utils.StridedMemoryView` now supports DLPack export via
  ``from_dlpack()`` array API.


New features
------------

- Added the :mod:`cuda.core.graph` public module containing
  :class:`~graph.GraphDef` for explicit graph construction, typed node
  subclasses, and supporting types. :class:`~graph.GraphBuilder` (stream
  capture) also moves into this module.

- Added :meth:`~graph.GraphBuilder.callback` for CPU callbacks during stream
  capture, mirroring the existing :meth:`~graph.GraphDef.callback` API.

- Added :class:`GraphicsResource` for CUDA-OpenGL interoperability.
  Factory classmethods :meth:`~GraphicsResource.from_gl_buffer` and
  :meth:`~GraphicsResource.from_gl_image` register OpenGL objects for CUDA
  access, and mapping returns a :class:`Buffer` for zero-copy kernel use.

- Added :class:`TensorMapDescriptor` wrapping the CUDA driver's ``CUtensorMap``
  for Hopper+ TMA (Tensor Memory Accelerator) bulk data movement.
  :class:`~utils.StridedMemoryView` gains an :meth:`~utils.StridedMemoryView.as_tensor_map`
  method for convenient descriptor creation, with automatic dtype inference, stride
  computation, and first-class kernel argument integration.

- Added DLPack export support to :class:`~utils.StridedMemoryView` via
  ``__dlpack__`` and ``__dlpack_device__``, complementing the existing import
  path.

- Added the DLPack C exchange API (``__dlpack_c_exchange_api__``) to
  :class:`~utils.StridedMemoryView`.

- Added NVRTC precompiled header (PCH) support (CUDA 12.8+).
  :class:`ProgramOptions` gains ``pch``, ``create_pch``, ``use_pch``,
  ``pch_dir``, and related options. :attr:`Program.pch_status` reports the
  PCH creation outcome, and ``compile()`` automatically resizes the NVRTC
  PCH heap and retries when PCH creation fails due to heap exhaustion.

- Added NUMA-aware managed memory pool placement.
  :class:`ManagedMemoryResourceOptions` gains a ``preferred_location_type``
  option (``"device"``, ``"host"``, or ``"host_numa"``), and
  :attr:`ManagedMemoryResource.preferred_location` queries the resolved
  location. The existing ``preferred_location`` parameter retains full
  backwards compatibility.

- Added NUMA-aware pinned memory pool placement.
  :class:`PinnedMemoryResourceOptions` gains a ``numa_id`` option, and
  :attr:`PinnedMemoryResource.numa_id` queries the host NUMA node ID used for
  pool placement. When ``ipc_enabled=True`` and ``numa_id`` is not set, the
  NUMA node is automatically derived from the current CUDA device.

- Added support for CUDA 13.2.


New examples
------------

- ``gl_interop_plasma.py``: Real-time plasma effect demonstrating CUDA-OpenGL
  interoperability via :class:`GraphicsResource`.
- ``tma_tensor_map.py``: TMA bulk data movement using
  :class:`TensorMapDescriptor` on Hopper+ GPUs.


Fixes and enhancements
----------------------

- Fixed managed memory buffers being misclassified as ``kDLCUDAHost`` in DLPack
  device mapping. They are now correctly reported as ``kDLCUDAManaged``.
  (`#1863 <https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/pull/1863>`__)
- Fixed IPC-enabled pinned memory pools using a hardcoded NUMA node ID of ``0``
  instead of the NUMA node closest to the active CUDA device. On multi-NUMA
  systems where the device is attached to a non-zero host NUMA node, this could
  cause pool creation or allocation failures. (`#1603 <https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/issues/1603>`__)
- Fixed :attr:`DeviceMemoryResource.peer_accessible_by` returning stale results when wrapping
  a non-owned (default) memory pool. The property now always queries the CUDA driver for
  non-owned pools, so multiple wrappers around the same pool see consistent state. (`#1720 <https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/issues/1720>`__)
- Fixed a bare ``except`` clause in stream acceptance that silently swallowed all exceptions,
  including ``KeyboardInterrupt`` and ``SystemExit``. Only the expected "protocol not
  supported" case is now caught. (`#1631 <https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/issues/1631>`__)
- :class:`~utils.StridedMemoryView` now validates strides at construction time so unsupported
  layouts fail immediately instead of on first metadata access. (`#1429 <https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/issues/1429>`__)
- IPC file descriptor cleanup now uses a C++ ``shared_ptr`` with a POSIX deleter, avoiding
  cryptic errors when a :class:`DeviceMemoryResource` is destroyed during Python shutdown.
- Improved error message when :class:`ManagedMemoryResource` is called without options on platforms
  that lack a default managed memory pool (e.g. WSL2). (`#1617 <https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/issues/1617>`__)
- Handle properties on core API objects now return ``None`` during Python shutdown instead of
  crashing.
- Reduced Python overhead in :class:`Program` and :class:`Linker` by moving compilation and
  linking operations to the C level and releasing the GIL during backend calls. This benefits
  workloads that create many programs or linkers, and enables concurrent compilation in
  multithreaded applications.
- Error enum explanations are now derived from ``cuda-bindings`` docstrings when available
  (bindings 12.9.6+ or 13.2.0+), with frozen tables as fallback for older versions.
- Improved optional dependency handling for NVVM and nvJitLink imports so that only genuinely
  missing optional modules are treated as unavailable; unrelated import failures now surface
  normally, and ``cuda.core`` now depends directly on ``cuda-pathfinder``.
