.. SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright (c) 2026 NVIDIA CORPORATION & AFFILIATES. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

.. currentmodule:: cuda.core

``cuda.core`` 1.0.1 Release Notes
=================================


Breaking changes
----------------

- :class:`LaunchConfig` fields (``grid``, ``block``, ``cluster``,
  ``shmem_size``, ``is_cooperative``) are now read-only after construction.
  Assigning to them from Python raises ``AttributeError``. Mutation was
  previously possible but was never intended given that :class:`LaunchConfig`
  is a hashable value type. Code that mutates a config after creation should
  construct a new :class:`LaunchConfig` instead.


Fixes and enhancements
----------------------

- Fixed ``ImportError`` when importing ``cuda.core`` with
  ``cuda-bindings`` 13.0.x due to an unavailable driver function
  (``cuDevSmResourceSplit``).
  (`#2063 <https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/issues/2063>`__,
  `#2064 <https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/pull/2064>`__)
- When iterating over MIG devices with
  ``cuda.core.system.Device.mig.get_all_devices``, only available MIG devices will
  be returned. Previously, if any MIG device was unavailable, an exception would
  be raised. (`#2065 <https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/issues/2065>`__)
- When converting an NVML device (``cuda.core.system.Device``) to a CUDA device
  (``cuda.core.Device``), using ``cuda.core.system.Device.to_cuda_device``, if the
  device does not have a matching CUDA device, a ``RuntimeError`` will be raised.
  Previously, a ``cuda.core.system.InvalidArgumentError`` would be raised.  For
  example, this may happen for physical devices on a MIG system.
