.. SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright (c) 2025-2026 NVIDIA CORPORATION & AFFILIATES. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

.. py:currentmodule:: cuda.pathfinder

``cuda-pathfinder`` 1.4.1 Release notes
=======================================

Released on Mar 6, 2026

Highlights
----------

* Add support for loading CUPTI (CUDA Profiling Tools Interface) dynamic libs
  via ``load_nvidia_dynamic_lib("cupti")`` on Linux and Windows. CUPTI libraries
  are discovered in site-packages (CUDA 12 and 13), Conda environments, and
  CTK installations (via CUDA_HOME/CUDA_PATH or canary probe).
  Supports ``libcupti.so.12``, ``libcupti.so.13`` on Linux and versioned
  ``cupti64_*.dll`` files on Windows.
  (`PR #1693 <https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/pull/1693>`_)

* Add support for finding static libraries (e.g., ``libcudadevrt.a`` on Linux,
  ``cudadevrt.lib`` on Windows) via new ``find_static_lib()`` and
  ``locate_static_lib()`` APIs. These follow the same search order as bitcode
  libraries: site-packages, Conda, then CUDA_HOME/CUDA_PATH.
  (`PR #1690 <https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/pull/1690>`_)

* Fix site-packages search order for virtual environments created with
  ``--system-site-packages``. The search now correctly prioritizes the venv's
  site-packages before user-site-packages, conforming to PEP 405.
  (`PR #1717 <https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/pull/1717>`_)

Internal refactoring
--------------------

* Refactor library discovery and loading to use a descriptor-driven architecture.
  All library metadata (SONAMEs, DLLs, site-packages paths, dependencies, loader
  flags) is now consolidated into a single ``LibDescriptor`` registry, improving
  maintainability and extensibility. This is an internal refactoring with no
  behavioral changes.
  (`PR #1685 <https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/pull/1685>`_)
